High in this video we're going to look at the comparison operators.
Now the comparison operators can be categorized into different groups but in general they are all binary
operators which means that they have two operands.
That's what I mean by binary operators for example plus is a binary operator.
It takes two operands A plus B on the other hand upgrade is it like not.
For example are unitary operators they only take a single operand like not a.
They also evaluate to a bool value.
So the comparison operators evaluates to a boolean.
So we have identity operations.
For example IS and IS NOT.
We've seen those before and they compare memory address of all variables.
And so it really works for any type.
We don't have to worry about the type.
Every object has a memory address so therefore we can always do a comparison between memory addresses
that also have value comparisons.
Again we've seen this one before.
Equals equals and not equals.
These compare values so different types are OK but the types have to be compatible with each other.
You can compare a number to a string.
For example then we have the ordering comparisons the ordering comparisons are things like less than
greater than less than a week or two.
And so on and those don't work for all types and we'll see when it comes to an muri times hard works.
And then we have membership operations membership operations or things like in and not in.
And this is used for iterable types and we'll get to those later in the schools.
So we'll focus on the numeric types here.
And then the other types including it for goals and you know with the membership operations we'll look
at when we get to the section on sequences and dictionaries and sets and so on so that your comparisons
will work of all numeric types but the mixed types except complex involving or in comparison is supported.
So we can work with equality like equals equals and not equals.
We're all numeric types but the comparison operator is like less than greater than will not work with
complex numbers but it will work with mixed types so you can compare an end to a float or an end to
a fraction or a decimal to a fraction.
All those work the only one that doesn't work in here is the complex numbers so you have to be careful
though.
Remember when we were looking at floats and decimals you know if you try and compare two floats at the
equals equals doesn't really work that well.
Right.
So equality operations don't work that well with floats.
And then the same thing if you try and do floats and decimals together.
Right.
So decimals to decimals sure that we can use that equals equals but floats to decimals or floats with
floats.
We really have to be careful there because of the binary representation of floats we have inexact representations
and therefore we run into issues.
So for example you could say ten point zero equals equals decimal 10.0 that will work.
So we're comparing a float to a decimal and that will actually return true.
But that's because 10.0 has an exact flow representation which would be ten point zero.
So that works on the other hand as we've seen before if we try and do 0.1 where we know that has an
inexact representation that's an infinite expansion whereas decimal in you know in the binary 10 in
the base 10 system there what one is exact.
So 0.1 is exact as a decimal but it's not exact as a float and therefore we get you know a false.
So we're going to be careful there.
But we can also compare decimals to fractions.
So 0.1 to five as a decimal is precisely equal to one eighth.
So this would actually evaluate to TRUE TRUE is as we've seen before actually equal to 1.
So that would evaluate to true.
And the same thing here with comparing a boolean to a fraction but that fraction 3 over 3 is 1.
So this would be true as well.
So next let's look at the ordering comparisons.
So again these work across all numeric types except for complex numbers.
So for example we can say one is less than 3.1 for that will evaluate to true.
So as you can see we're comparing an int to a float with this come order in comparison.
And that was same thing.
We can compare a fraction to a float that will work as well 22 over 7 Zak's a little bit bigger than
pi.
So that will evaluate to true.
Then we can compare decimals to fractions that will evaluate to true as well a half 0.5 is less than
two thirds So that's true.
We can also look at booleans and compare them to other types so a boolean compared to a decimal 1 1
which is true is less than 3.1 4.
So again that will evaluate to true.
And then you have a fraction that you can also compare to a boolean.
So two thirds is greater than zero which is what the value is a false as an integer.
So that will evaluate to true as well.
Now what's really interesting were these comparison operators and the equality operators too is that
we can train them.
So for example you could say eight equals equals B equals equals C.
Now that's just a syntax basically which really means the following.
It means that a is equal to B and B is equal to see.
So all it does is that it just basically pairs them up and it puts an end in between.
And the same thing works with the comparison operators.
The you know the older a comparison operator so a less then be less than c simply means that is less
than B and B is less than c and so it will test that boolean expression So for example we can say one
equals equals decimal 1.0 equals equals fractioned one.
Come one.
Well one is equal to decimal 1.0 and one point only as a decimal is equal to the fraction one on one.
So this will return true.
On the other hand if we look at this one.
One equals equals decimal 1.5.
Well that's false.
So that is not equal even though decimal 1.5 is equal to fractions 3.2.
We don't satisfy both of the conditions in the end.
And so this will evaluate to false.
Same thing with the ordering.
We can say one less than two less than three.
Well one is less than 2 and 2 is less than three.
That's in fact what we're trying to evaluate here.
And of course this is true.
You can also do something like this.
One is less than math.
Pi is less than fraction 22.
Com so we can mix the types.
So it's perfectly fine to mix types in the chain comparisons to.
So this just means one is less than math of Pi and math pi is less than fraction 22 over 7 which happens
to be true.
So for the chain comparisons you don't always have to keep the you know the comparison operator of the
same.
You can mix it so you can write an expression like this which really kind of looks weird from a mathematical
standpoint this doesn't make any sense.
We wouldn't write that.
But remember all this means is that we're looking at is less than B and B is greater than c.
So from Python's perspective this makes total sense so for example five is less than six is greater
than two.
Well this is five is less than six and six is greater than two.
That's what it actually means.
So this is true because five is less than six and six is greater than two.
Those both both operands are true so the and is.
On the other hand five less than six greater than 10.
Well that means five is less than six and six is greater than 10.
Six is no greater than 10.
So this expression here will evaluate to false we can of course train more than just three.
We can have as many as we want.
So you can write a less than B is less than c is less than D.
That's perfectly fine.
It's just going to evaluate it as A's less than B and B is less than c and c is less than D.
It just basically keeps splitting it up and replacing the pairs you know pairwise Wolfen and in between.
So for example we could say one is less than two is less than three is less than four.
This is what we actually evaluating.
And of course this is true.
And when you read this expression that kind of makes sense.
Yeah.
You know even in math we would write it this way that would be perfectly fine.
Now of course just as before where you didn't have to keep the same operator Well same thing here.
We can't have you know these things mixed in.
So we have one is less than 10 is greater than four is less than five.
That's starting to look a little weird but this really just evaluates to one is less than 10 and 10
is greater than four and four is less than five.
Well in this case all of these things are true.
So the result is true.
Now you can go overboard with this hand.
You could write code like this if myman is equal equals C.A. is less than Val is greater than other
is less than or equal to my emacs and not ls t.
That works fine.
Again it's just doing the pairwise things with the ands in between so saying myman equals equal C.A.
and C.A. is less than thou and value is greater than other and other is less than or equal to my math
and my match is not in LSD where LSD is some sequence type some iterable So yeah you can write that.
But it's really confusing.
In fact Bob would actually be horrified to see code like this.
So you can write it and maybe in some cases it might make sense to write some expression like this but
in general stay away from it.
That makes code quite unreadable.
So are you going to keep it to a level that's a little more appropriate.
So now let's switch to some code and see all this in action.
Let's take a quick look at these comparison operators.
So we'll start with the identity and membership operators and the identity operator is is you know of
course that is not.
And this will walk across any data type since any data type is an object and every object obviously
is a memory therefore it has a memory address and therefore you can compare it.
You can do things like zero point one is and you can even compare that to let's say a complex number.
Of course that would be false.
You know and we have three is free will that of course is true since it's the same object remember that
up to a certain limit the integers or singleton objects in Python.
But if you take like two lists for example that will return false since they are not created equal.
In other words they are from a value perspective they are equal but from a memory standpoint they are
not.
And we covered in more detail in some of your videos in the scores.
So we have the identity operators now that will walk across any type.
We also have the in and the not in which our membership operators and this will work with iterable types.
So typically you might do something like a in.
This is a test.
For example and of course that returns true since the character is present in that string.
It works also with lists which are troubles.
So you can say for example three in one to three.
And of course that returns true to three knots in one and three that will return false and 3 is in that
list.
So that's for the membership operations in and not in.
We'll take a look at those and a lot more detail when we start looking at troubles in general.
You can also actually do it for our dictionaries as well so dictionaries for example you could check
to see if a key exists in a dictionary.
So let's say the dictionary is the one with a value of one.
And the key is present in the dictionary.
So by default the membership operator will look for membership of keys in dictionaries and mapping types
for example we might do something like this we might check to see is one in key one one.
And the answer is no because it only checks the keys not the van.
The next thing I want to look at are the comparison operators.
Now the comparison operators will again work with mixed types and most data types will support comparisons
as well.
Certainly most of the numeric types.
Actually all of the numeric types except for complex numbers support and ordering.
So if you try and do that say three less than five yeah that works that's pretty obvious.
But if you have let's say one plus one J.
Less than three plus four J.
While that's not going to work because the less the ordering the less than and therefore greater than
and the you know equal variance are not supported with complex numbers but for the numeric types you
can mix any other data type.
So for example let's import from decimal let's import decimal and from fractions low into fraction.
So now we've got these two classes that we can use and you can start mixing things together.
So for less than decimal arm ten point five for example you can compare an end to a decimal.
You can compare a fraction fraction two thirds less than decimal.
Let's make it something that smaller this time.
So it's two zero point five.
So we get false.
Two thirds is actually greater than one half and so on.
So you can mix your data types.
That's not a problem in terms of equality.
Which also compares values.
You don't need the Oldring.
And again you can mix all the numeric types together.
And this one includes the complex numbers.
So you can say four equals four plus 0 J if you want.
That will be true.
But you know I mean comparing using equality for complex numbers is the same problem that we have using
equality for comparing floats.
You don't have an exact representation since Remember that the real imaginary pounds of complex numbers
are stored using floats.
So we can run to a problem there.
And in general if you're dealing of real numbers and complex numbers all they're really going to be
equal if you have an imaginary power.
So it's not that useful but it can work.
You know you may you may need it for certain things and then you have other weird things like.
For example you can test to see that's equal to fraction to come common to count or two.
And the answer is yes because true is really just one and fraction to come up to 1.
So again you can mix those things together.
And of course you can also do it this way you can ask whether true is less than fraction three comma
two that say.
And the answer is yes because one is less than three house.
So that's kind of getting weird.
But you can certainly do that as well.
The booleans are the ones that are a little bit weird that way.
But you can mix and match any numeric type that you want with the Oldring operations except for complex
numbers.
Those are not supported.
All right then the last thing that I really want to look at is the chained comparisons and we saw before
that if we have a chain comparison like one is less than two is less than three.
All it means.
And this is true.
All it means is that it's evaluating one is less than 2 and is less than three.
OK.
Now what's interesting with this is that you also get short circuiting because if you think about this
this isn't.
And we saw that if this is false then the end is going to short circuit and just return false.
And that actually happens in the chained comparisons as well.
So we might say something like three is less than two.
That's going to be false is less than.
And I'm going to do a division by zero error here.
And when we run this it doesn't error out.
And that's because it never tried to evaluate one divided by zero.
It's short circuited because what did we have.
In fact we have three less than two and two less than 1 divided by zero.
OK that's short circuits.
We don't have this problem here.
So that's kind of weird.
But it does actually work it does short circuits.
Now of goes to show you that the short circuiting is in place.
Well I mean you should see it from here that we didn't get an error but if we were to write three at
less than four in less than one divided by zero.
Now we get a division by zero error because this evaluated to true.
So now it had to test this.
And of course it has to evaluate then the side here because this was a non-zero number it was false.
So what started this entire thing has to be evaluated because this was true was not false.
OK.
Now you can start doing some really weird stuff too.
You don't have to always use the same operator so you could say one there's less than two is greater
than negative five pride.
And this of course is true.
One is less than two and two is greater than negative five.
So this is just shorthand notation that really just gets you think about it gets rewritten this way.
That's kind of how it's being evaluated.
So you can do other weird things too.
You can say one is less than two is greater than negative five which is equal to decimal.
Let's say is negative five point zero.
OK.
And this works as well because one is less than two and two is greater than negative five and negative
five is equal to decimal negative five.
So that works just fine.
Now you can do work even weirder things.
Let's import the string module we can get a couple of constants cause we can work with our strings.
Now the default ordering of stringers lexicographic will take a look at that.
When we look at strings in our sections on the on list on sequences later in the schools but capital
A comes before Little A in the ASCII table if you take a look at that arm you'll see that it's got a
smaller numerical value.
So capital is less than negative a less than a lowercase a sorry.
So let's go ahead and expand this a little bit so we can again start changing things together.
OK.
So this is all fine.
All right.
Capital a less than a and a less than z and z greater than capital Z.
So of course all these things are true pairwise And so they get anded and they're true as a result.
But you can also if you want mixin other operators as I said you don't have to keep just the same operators
already here we saw that we mixed in less than and greater than operators.
We can also throw in a membership operator in let's say string dark ASCII letters.
OK that's fine too.
And capital Z is in straight ASCII letters.
So again with things fully evaluates to true.
So you can do all those things.
There's nothing really that stops you from you know doing that.
It's kind of confusing right if you want to see in code something you know written like this obviously
you'd have variables you wouldn't necessarily have literals everywhere.
You'd have variables in some places it gets confusing.
So I would recommend not doing that but you know it's it's pretty easy to read it.
It's just that you have to spend time reading and it's not immediately obvious anyway up to you whether
you want to use that or not the option is there and certainly for things like you know testing like
for example men is less than a is less than max.
Let's say this is you know we have a man is equal to zero Max equals 100.
And let's say we have an age which is equal to 44 and we want to check to see that age is between min
and max.
OK.
This is the kind of thing where it really does make sense.
And it really shines in terms of being able to change these operators.
All right.
Thanks for watching and I'll see you in the next video.